# Bogo Sort

* Bogo Sort is a sorting algorithm that could technically end up *never* terminating.

* Here are the steps of Bogo Sort:
    * Check to see if the array is already sorted.
    * If so, we're done, terminate.
    * Otherwise, randomly shuffle the array and start from the top.

* This is an utterly preposterous algorithm, but it also have an interesting property:
    * Note that we need only check the array up until a point where we notice that it's not sorted.
    * When this happens, we shuffle the *entire* array, which is a series of swaps over every element.
    * As a result, we have asymptotically fewer comparisons (in expectation) compared to the number of swaps.
    * This is in contrast to the other iterative sorting algorithms we've seen, where each individual swap was the result of making one or more comparisons.

**Theorem.** The best-case number of comparisons for Bogo Sort is $O\left(n\right)$.

**Proof.**

In the best case, the given array is already sorted, and so the algorithm terminates after $n-1$ comparisons.

**QED**

**Theorem.** The worst-case number of comparisons for Bogo Sort is infinite.

**Proof.**

However unlikely, it's possible that the shuffling step never produces a perfectly shuffled array, and so the iteration never ends.

**QED**

**Theorem.** [Gruber--Holzer--Ruepp '07] Let $C$ be a random variable for the number of comparisons and $S$ the random variable for the number of swaps that BogoSort does under a uniform distribution on the permutations of $\left\lbrace 1,\ldots, n\right\rbrace$. Then, $\mathbb{E}\left[C\right]{\sim}\left(e-1\right)\cdot n!$ and $\mathbb{E}\left[S\right] = \left(n-1\right)\cdot n!$.

As the proof of this theorem requires a bit of extra probability theory that I think is beyond the scope of this course, I'll just leave a reference to the paper for those who want a nice probability workout (links to a PDF file):

* Gruber, H.; Holzer, M.; Ruepp, O. (2007), "Sorting the slow way: an analysis of perversely awful randomized sorting algorithms", [4th International Conference on Fun with Algorithms, Castiglioncello, Italy, 2007](http://www.hermann-gruber.com/pdf/fun07-final.pdf), Lecture Notes in Computer Science, vol. 4475, Springer-Verlag, pp. 183–197, doi:10.1007/978-3-540-72914-3_17, ISBN 978-3-540-72913-6.

**Next: [Divide & Conquer Sorting Algorithms](./17.DivideAndConquerSorts.md)**