### List ADT
* An *array* is a contiguous area of memory that holds multiple values of a specified type.

* Since arrays are stored contiguously, accessing an element of an array is treated as an $O\left(1\right)$ operation. This is because, if we denote the address of the initial element of the array by $x$, the index by $i$, and the size of the elements stored by $s$, accessing an element is as easy as doing some *pointer arithmetic*, which results in dereferencing the pointer $x + is$.

* We will use arrays in the first implementation of the *List ADT*.

* An *Abstract Data Type* (or *ADT*) is a description of behaviors and operations for a type. Other terms used to describe this are *interface* or *API*.

* Implementations of an ADT are *data structures* that give actual mechanics which satisfy the requirements specified by the ADT.

* The *List ADT* specifies a sequence of data that can be accessed by indexing. The following are the minimum required for the List ADT:
    * `addAtIndex(int index, T data)`: Adds the `data` to the list at the specified `index`. Any data beyond `index` are given more space and indices are increased by $1$ to make room for the new `data`.
    * `removeAtIndex(int index)`: Removes the `data` at the specified `index` from the list. Any data beyond `index` have indices decreased by $1$ to maintain the sequence.
    * `get(int index)`: Returns the `data` stored at `index`.
    * `isEmpty()`: Returns whether the list is empty or not.
    * `clear()`: Resets the list to an initial configuration with no data.
    * `size()`: Returns the number of data currently stored in the list.

* Note that the above specifications/requirements give no real mention of how to mechanically implement each method.

* One implementation of the List ADT is the `ArrayList`.

* An `ArrayList` is a List data structure backed by an array.

* The array in an `ArrayList` is *dynamic* because its capacity can be increased when necessary. This is done through reallocating space and copying the contents of the array over.

* As a result, the running time for this resize is $O\left(n\right)$. However, we will analyze this more closely to show that, in some sense, this isn't the full story.

* An `ArrayList` has three requirements:
    * The data is contiguous.
    * The data is zero-aligned.
    * The `size` is stored to efficiently index to the next spot in the array.

* There are two cases when adding an element to the end:
    * If there is enough capacity, the element is placed at the index specified by the `size` data member, and `size` is increased. This takes $O\left(1\right)$ time.
    * If there is *not* enough capacity, a new array is allocated (typically double the size), the elements of the previous array are copied over, and then the new element is added to the end. This, in total, takes $O\left(n\right)$ time.

* Note, however, that this second case is much rarer than the first, assuming we resize by doubling the capacity. Because of this, we make use of an analysis technique called *amortized analysis* to give a better bound by considering the context in which this second operation occurs.

* When adding elsewhere to the `ArrayList`, the complexity $O\left(n\right)$ in the worst case, because we may need to shift a significant number of elements over so that we can insert our new element. This is because we don't want to overwrite the element that is already there.

* When removing an element, there are two cases:
    * If we remove from the end of an `ArrayList`, it is always $O\left(1\right)$, because we don't have to mess with anything else.
    * Removing from elsewhere has a worst case $O\left(n\right)$ complexity, because we need to shift everything that was to the right of the position where we removed the element one spot to the left.

**Next: [Amortized Analysis of Dynamic Arrays](./3.DynamicArrayAnalysis.md)**