# Depth-First Search (DFS)

* *Depth-First Search* (DFS) is a graph traversal algorithm that visits all vertices in a graph in the connected component of the initial vertex its given, its *source*.

* DFS explores a path of the graph as far as it can before moving down the next unexplored branch from the source vertex, hence the "depth-first" in its name.

* DFS works by initially choosing an edge from the source vertex, and then traversing.
    * At each step, we choose an edge and traverse until we reach a vertex where no edge leads to an unvisited vertex.
    * When this happens, we move back one step at a time until we reach a vertex where we *can* select an edge to reach an unvisited vertex.
    * As a result, by the time we get back to the original source vertex, every vertex reachable from our initial edge choice will have been visited.
    * We do this until there are no longer any edges which take us to an unvisited vertex from the source node.

* There are two implementations of DFS for a single connected component, which we will describe using pseudocode.

* The non-recursive implementation which makes use of a stack and a set structure.
    * Algoritm `DFS(G, s)`:
        * Initialize a set `VS` (the "visited set") and a stack `S`.
        * Push `s` to the stack.
        * While `S` is not empty:
            * `v = S.pop()`
            * if `v` is not in `VS`:
                * *Do Stuff* (this is where we make use of DFS to actually do something)
                * `VS.add(v)`
                * For all `u` adjacent to `v`:
                    * if `u` not in `VS`:
                        * `S.push(u)`

* The recursive version is, in some sense, easier, as long as you either pass the set as an argument or have it as part of some global state.
    * Algoritm `DFS(G, s)`:
        * `VS.add(s)`
        * For all `v` adjacent to `s`:
            * if `v` not in `VS`:
                * *Do Stuff* (this is where we make use of DFS to actually do something)
                * `DFS(G, v)`

* The pseudocode above elides the particular representation of `G`, which will determine exactly how the `for` loop will work.
    * The graph representation will affect how we access the adjacency information for our vertex (either via a list or matrix).
    * It will also play a part in which order we traverse, as one representation might "give us" a different vertex than another each iteration.
    * In the end, these are just mechanical, implementation-detailed considerations.

* As a review of previous concepts:
    * Note that the non-recursive version is just the recursive version with the stack and initialization of the visited set made explicit.
    * Recall that recursive functions make use of a stack behind-the-scenes when passing parameters.

**Theorem.** Given a connected graph $G$ and vertex $s$, DFS visits every vertex exactly once, and takes $O\left(n + m\right)$ steps.

**Proof.**

Any vertex that `DFS(G, v)` is called on is immediately marked as visited, and so won't be visited again. And because the `for` loop is over every vertex adjacent to the called vertex, every vertex reachable from $s$ will eventually be visited.

Each vertex being visited accounts for $O\left(n\right)$ of the runtime, while the `for` loop over all calls of `DFS(G, v)` eventually considers all pairs $\left(v, w\right)\in E$, and so these loops iterate a total of $O\left(m\right)$ times. Hence, the runtime is $O\left(n + m\right)$. 

**QED**

## Some Applications of DFS to Graphs

* DFS can be used to detect if a graph is connected.
    * If not connected, we can count the number of connected components:
        * Initialize a variable `componentCount = 0`.
        * For each $v\in V$:
            * if `v` not in `VS`:
                * `componentCount++;`
                * `DFS(G, v)`
        * return `componentCount`.

* DFS can be used to detect cycles.
    * At any point during `DFS`, if we reach a node that's been visited already, return `true`.

* With the above two, we can detect if a graph is a tree by determining if it's connected or if it has cycles.

* We can construct a *spanning tree* of the graph, which is a subgraph $T = \left(V, E'\right)$ of $G = \left(V, E\right)$ which contains all the vertices but is also a tree.

**Next: [Breadth-First Search](./24.BFS.md)**