# Breadth-First Search (BFS)

* *Breadth-First Search* (BFS) is another graph traversal algorithm that visits all vertices in a graph in the connected component of the source.

* Unlike DFS, BFS traverses every edge from the current vertex before moving beyond.
    * We visit the source vertex, followed by vertices 1 edge away, then (thus far unvisited) vertices 2 edges away, etc.
    * Recall the [level-order traversal](./8.TreeTraversals.md) for BSTs.

* BFS works very much like the non-recursive DFS pseudocode, but with the stack replaced by a queue, and adding vertices to the visited set before enqueuing.

* Algoritm `BFS(G, s)`:
    * Initialize a set `VS` (the "visited set") and a queue `Q`.
    * `VS.add(s)`
    * `Q.enqueue(s)`
    * While `Q` is not empty:
        * `v = Q.dequeue()`
        * for all `u` adjacent to `v`:
            * if `u` is not in `VS`:
                * `VS.add(u)`
                * `Q.enqueue(u)`

**Theorem.** Given a connected graph $G$ and vertex $s$, BFS visits every vertex exactly once, and takes $O\left(n + m\right)$ steps.

**Proof.**

Like in the DFS proof, any vertex that `BFS(G, v)` is called on is immediately marked as visited, and so won't be visited again. And because the `for` loop is over every vertex adjacent to the called vertex, every vertex reachable from $s$ will eventually be visited.

Each vertex being visited accounts for $O\left(n\right)$ of the runtime, while the `for` loop over all calls of `BFS(G, v)` eventually considers all pairs $\left(v, w\right)\in E$, and so these loops iterate a total of $O\left(m\right)$ times. Hence, the runtime is $O\left(n + m\right)$.

**QED**

## BFS vs DFS?

* Since DFS and BFS have similar complexities, the choice between them will depend more on the specific structures of the inputs and what your goals are.

* Here are just a few ideas to think about when choosing between DFS and BFS:
    * If we know where we want to go and we know that it should be close to our source, BFS will work better, as it searches nearby vertices before moving farther out.
    * On the other hand, if we expect that what we're looking for will be far away, DFS moves far away much quicker.
    * The shape of our graph can affect the memory footprint of BFS and DFS, as "wide" graphs (graphs where the source has many edges) will use a lot of space in the queue, while "deep" graphs (think a linked list structure) will push a lot of stuff to the stack.

**Next: [Dijkstra's Algorithm](./25.Dijkstra.md)**