# Dijkstra's Algorithm

* *Dijkstra's algorithm* is a graph traversal algorithm which takes a weighted graph $G = \left(V, E\right)$ and a source vertex $s\in V$ and computes the lengths of the shortest paths from $s$ to every other vertex in $V$.

* The idea behind Dijkstra's algorithm, as we'll see, is simple:
    * The shortest path $u \leadsto v$ is made of the shortest path $u \leadsto w$, where $w$ is the last vertex before $v$, plus the edge $\left(w, v\right)$.
    * In other words, consider a sequence of vertices $v_{1},\ldots, v_{k}$ making up the shortest path $v_{1}\leadsto v_{k}$.
        * Define $w\left(u, u'\right)$ to be the weight of $\left(u, u'\right)\in E$.
        * Define $d\left(u\leadsto v\right)$ to be the length of the shortest path $u\leadsto v$.
        * Then, $d\left(v_{1}\leadsto v_{k}\right) = d\left(v_{1}\leadsto v_{k-1}\right) + w\left(v_{k-1}, v_{k}\right)$.

* *Warning!* Dijkstra's algorithm only works on paths with non-negative edge weights.
    * Otherwise, we might enter a neverending cycle of negative-weight edges that don't actually make progress.

* Here's how Dijkstra's algorithm works.
    * We start by assigning every vertex a value of $\infty$.
    * When we find a path $s\leadsto v$ that has a shorter cummulative weight than what was previously stored for $v$, we replace that value with this new best weight.
        * Note that we may update this several times as we come to find better paths through other vertices.
    * We continue until we can no longer reach any more vertices.

* To implement Dijkstra's algorithm, we use a Priority Queue `PQ`, a Visited Set `VS`, and a Distance Map `DM`.
    * `PQ` holds the total path lengths from the source vertex to the current vertex.
    * `DM` stores the vertices as keys with the shortest path lengths as values.

* `Dijkstra(G, s)`:
    * Initialize `VS`, `DM`, and `PQ` to be empty.
    * for all `v in V`:
        * `DM(v)` is set to $\infty$.
    * `PQ.enqueue(s, 0)`
    * while `PQ` is not empty:
        * `u,d = PQ.dequeue()`
        * if `u` not in `VS`:
            * `VS.add(u)`
            * `DM(u) = d`
            * for all `v` adjacent to `u`:
                * if `v` not in `VS`:
                    * `PQ.enqueue(v, d + w(u, v))`

**Theorem.** Dijkstra's algorithm correctly finds the distance of the shortest paths $s\leadsto v$, with vertices where no path exists given a distance of $\infty$, for all $v\in V$.

**Proof.**

At any given step of Dijkstra's algorithm, the vertex set is partitioned into three pieces:
1. The Visited Set - This is the set of vertices that have already been visited, and so their shortest paths have been found.
2. The Frontier Set - This is the set of vertices that are currently in `PQ` but not yet visited, and so their shortest paths may not have been found yet.
3. The Unexplored Set - This is the set of vertices not yet visited or put into `PQ`.

In the initial state of our Dijkstra's algorithm, every vertex is unexplorered. Then, we add the source to the frontier with a weight of 0, which then gets popped and is correctly given a weight of 0 as its shortest path.

In the middle of Dijkstra's algorithm, whenever a frontier vertex $v$ is popped from `PQ`, we are also given a weight which consists of the length of the shorest path to a visited vertex adjacent to $v$ plus the weight of the edge connecting that vertex to $v$. Because we popped this instance of $v$ from `PQ`, that means this is the minimum cummulative weight among all occurrences of $v$ in `PQ`.

*Claim.* This weight is the length of the shortest path $s\leadsto v$.

*Proof of Claim.* Suppose not. Then, since `PQ` always pops a vertex with the minimum cummulative weight currently stored, the only possibility is that there is a shorter path through an unexplored vertex. However, if there were such a path, we would have popped vertices along that path before this instance of $v$, as they would have had smaller weights. Hence, no such alternative path exists. $\blacksquare$

Therefore, for any vertex reachable from $s$, we eventually pop it from `PQ` while it's on the frontier, and assign to it the length of the shortest path $s\leadsto v$, while any vertex not reachable from $s$ will never be enqueued, leaving them with a distance of $\infty$.

**QED**

## Performance of Dijkstra

* The performance of Dijsktra's algorithm will ultimately depend on the implementation of our priority queue.
    * Here, we'll only consider priority queues based on [binary heaps](./11.BinaryHeaps.md).
    * A priority queue based on a [Fibonacci heap](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fibonacci_heap) would technically lead to a better asymptotic result, but is not used in practice due to the coefficients involved.

**Theorem.** As described above, Dijkstra's algorithm has a complexity of $O\left(m \lg m\right)$.

**Proof.**

Each time a new path is considered and added to `PQ`, it can be thought of as a new edge extending from our vertex. Since we don't consider visited vertices, we don't reuse edges, and so we have $O\left(m\right)$ edges.

Because of this, we could potentially have $O\left(m\right)$ enqueue and pop operations from `PQ`, and each operation takes $O\left(\lg m\right)$ time. Therefore, the runtime for Dijkstra's algorithm is $O\left(m \lg m\right)$.

**QED**

## Optimizing Dijkstra's Algorithm

* We want to have a better guarantee without resorting to a Fibonacci heap.

* What if we allow updating the priority of nodes in our heap instead of just adding extra nodes in order to limit the number of nodes to the size of our vertex set?
    * We can implement an `update_priority()` method in `O\left(\lg n\right)` time which we will use to update the priorities of vertices rather than adding multiple copies of them.

* `Dijkstra(G, s)`:
    * Initialize `VS`, `DM`, and `PQ` to be empty.
    * for all `v in V`:
        * `DM(v)` is set to $\infty$.
        * if `v != s`:
            * `PQ.enqueue(v, INFINITY)`
    * `PQ.enqueue(s, 0)`
    * while `PQ` is not empty:
        * `u,d = PQ.dequeue()`
        * if `u` not in `VS`:
            * `VS.add(u)`
            * `DM(u) = d`
            * for all `v` adjacent to `u`:
                * Set `dist = d + w(u, v)`
                * if `v` not in `VS` and `DM[v] > dist`:
                    * `DM[v] = dist`
                    * `PQ.update_priority(v, dist)`

**Theorem.** This newly optimized Dijkstra's algorithm takes $O\left(\left(n + m\right) \lg n\right)$ time.

**Proof.**

Since we never add more items to `PQ` than there are vertices, `PQ` has size $O\left(n\right)$, and so operations take $O\left(\lg n\right)$ time. This also means that we pop from `PQ` $O\left(n\right)$ times.

The number of times we enqueue and update items in `PQ` is still $O\left(m\right)$, as we may consider every edge.

Therefore, the runtime of Dijkstra's algorithm is $O\left(\left(n + m\right) \lg n\right)$, as required.

**QED**

* One might see this abbreviated to to $O\left(m \lg n\right)$ whenever the graph is connected, as connectivity requires $m\geq n - 1$.