# Trees

* A *tree* is a linked structure where each node has pointers to other nodes, called its *children* (the node, itself, is called the *parent*). A singly-linked list is an example of a tree, albeit a very lopsided one.

* Each node has a single parent, but could have any number of child nodes.

* A tree's nodes need not have bidirectional links (so child nodes need not point to their parent). This is the case in singly-linked lists.

* As with doubly-linked lists, we can also define parent pointers for each node to introduce bidirectional links.

* There is only one node with 0 parents, and it's called the *root* node. A node with children is called an *internal node*. A node with no children is called either an *external node* or *leaf*.

* The relationships between nodes have similar names to typical familial relationships. For instance, the parent of a parent is called a *grandparent* node. Nodes which share a parent node are called *sibling* nodes. Nodes whose parents are siblings are called *cousin* nodes.

* A tree is a recursive structure. When going from the root to a child, we can think of the child as the root of its own tree (called the *subtree* rooted at that node). In fact, any nonempty tree can be thought of as a node (the root node) which points to other trees, and we could write algorithms recursively to take advantage of that.

* We can classify nodes by their relative positions in the tree. The *depth* of a node is the distance from the root. The *height* of a tree is the length of the longest path from that node to a leaf node.
    * This means leaf nodes have a height of 0.
    * Non-leaf nodes have their heights calculated by taking the maximum height of their child nodes and adding 1. This is because the longest path from a node to a leaf is the path from that node to the child with the maximum height, followed by the path that exhibits that child node's height.

* Trees have no cycles, if we ignore parent pointers. This means that circularly-linked lists are not trees.

## Binary Trees
* *Binary trees* are trees where each node can have at most 2 children.
    * The child nodes are often labeled `left` and `right`.

* The *traversal order* of the nodes in a binary tree is defined recursively: For any given node, the nodes in the left subtree come before and the nodes in the right subtree come after.

* A *full* binary tree is one in which each node has either 0 or 2 child nodes.

* A *complete* binary tree is a full tree such that only the final level may have missing nodes, and the final level is filled left-to-right. In other words, there can't be a gap between nodes on the same level.

* A *degenerate* binary tree is one in which each internal node has 1 child.

* In order to iterate over a binary tree, we can make use of the recursive structure:
    ```java
    public void do_stuff() {
        do_stuff_with_node(root);
    }

    private void do_stuff_with_node(Node node) {
        if (node != null) {
            traverse(node.left);
            // do stuff with node
            traverse(node.right);
        }
    }
    ```
    * This takes the recursive structure of the binary tree as a root note which points to left/right subtrees which are, themselves, binary trees.

## Binary Search Tree
* A *binary search tree* (or *BST*) is a binary tree where the traversal order of the nodes matches the order of the data stored by the nodes. For instance, since `0 < 10`, in a binary search tree which searches for nodes based on the "less-than" relation on integers, th node storing `0` would be in the left subtree of the node storing `10`.

* In Java, a BST implements the `Comparable` interface.

* One motivation of a BST is that it naturally mimics the binary search algorithm for sorted arrays.
    * Each iteration essentially looks at the midpoint between two pieces of the data and discards the piece which cannot contain the data, similar to how binary search reduces the search range each time by discarding half of the array.
    * In a well-balanced BST, this splits the search space in half in each iteration, leading to a runtime of $O\left(\lg n\right)$.

* The above statement requires some mechanism for maintaining a balance to the BST. Without this guarantee, the actual runtime is $O\left(h\right)$ where $h$ is the height of the BST. We will see a way to maintain balance to ensure $h = \Theta\left(\lg n\right)$ in later notes.
    * Without balancing, $h$ could be $n$, since we could accidentally find ourselves with what is really just a linked list. This would, then, give us a $\Theta\left(n\right)$ runtime for searches.

* There are different ways to traverse a binary tree:
    * Depth Searches (Stack-Based):
        * Preorder Traversal - The `root` node is processed, followed by (recursively) the `left` subtree and the `right` subtree, respectively.
        * In-order Traversal - We recursively process the `left` subtree from `root`, then we process `root`, and, finally, we process the `right` subtree.
        * Postorder Traversal - We recursively process the `left` subtree from `root`, then the `right` subtree, and, finally, we process `root`.
    * Breadth Traversal (Queue-Based):
        * Levelorder Traversal: We traverse each level of the tree iteratively.

* These work for binary trees, in general, but we can gain particular insights from them when applied to BSTs.

**Next: [Tree Traversals](./8.TreeTraversals.md)**